

































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































ACT I
ACT III
A Hall in Capulet's House.
ACT V
ACT IV

A Room in Capulet's House.
A Room in Capulet's House.
A Street.
A Street.
A Street.
ACT II
Abraham.Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abraham.Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abraham.No better.
A churchyard; in it a Monument belonging to theCapulets.
Abraham.You lie.
Abraham, Servant to Montague.
Abraham.Quarrel, sir! no, sir.
[Advances.]
An Apothecary.
And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!
An Old Man, Uncle to Capulet.
An Officer.
An open Gallery to Juliet's Chamber, overlooking theGarden.
Apothecary.My poverty, but not my will consents.
Apothecary.Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's lawIs death to any he that utters them.
An open place adjoining Capulet's Garden.
Apothecary.Who calls so loud?
Apothecary.Put this in any liquid thing you will,And drink it off; and, if you had the strengthOf twenty men, it would despatch you straight.
A public place.
A public Place.
Balthasar.As I did sleep under this yew tree here,I dreamt my master and another fought,And that my master slew him.
Balthasar.For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
Balthasar.Full half an hour.
Balthasar.Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Balthasar.I brought my master news of Juliet's death;And then in post he came from MantuaTo this same place, to this same monument.This letter he early bid me give his father;And threaten'd me with death, going in the vault,If I departed not, and left him there.
Balthasar.I dare not, sir;My master knows not but I am gone hence;And fearfully did menace me with deathIf I did stay to look on his intents.
Balthasar.I do beseech you, sir, have patience:Your looks are pale and wild, and do importSome misadventure.
Balthasar.It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,One that you love.
Balthasar.Romeo.
Balthasar.No, my good lord.
Balthasar.I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Balthasar, Servant to Romeo.
Balthasar.Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,And her immortal part with angels lives.I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,And presently took post to tell it you:O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Benvolio.Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Benvolio.An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buythe fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Benvolio.Am I like such a fellow?
Benvolio.And what to?
Benvolio.An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Benvolio.A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Benvolio.Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Benvolio.But new struck nine.
Benvolio.By giving liberty unto thine eyes;Examine other beauties.
Benvolio.At thy good heart's oppression.
Benvolio.By my head, here come the Capulets.
Benvolio.Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,To be consorted with the humorous night:Blind is his love, and best befits the dark.
Benvolio.At this same ancient feast of Capulet'sSups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;With all the admired beauties of Verona.Go thither; and, with unattainted eye,Compare her face with some that I shall show,And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Benvolio.Come, knock and enter; and no sooner inBut every man betake him to his legs.
Benvolio.Good morrow, cousin.
Benvolio.Groan! why, no;But sadly tell me who.
Benvolio.Go then; for 'tis in vainTo seek him here that means not to be found.
Benvolio.For what, I pray thee?
Benvolio.Have you importun'd him by any means?
Benvolio.Be rul'd by me, forget to think of her.
Benvolio.Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!
Benvolio.He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:Call, good Mercutio.
Benvolio.Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Benvolio.Here were the servants of your adversaryAnd yours, close fighting ere I did approach:I drew to part them: in the instant cameThe fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,He swung about his head, and cut the winds,Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn:While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,Came more and more, and fought on part and part,Till the prince came, who parted either part.
Benvolio.I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt.
Benvolio.I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
Benvolio.I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl;For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Benvolio.In love?
Benvolio.I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,Or manage it to part these men with me.
Benvolio.It was. - What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Benvolio.Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sunPeer'd forth the golden window of the east,A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;Where, - underneath the grove of sycamoreThat westward rooteth from the city's side, - So early walking did I see your son:Towards him I made; but he was ware of me,And stole into the covert of the wood:I, measuring his affections by my own, - That most are busied when they're most alone, - Pursu'd my humour, not pursuing his,And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Benvolio.My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Benvolio.Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how hedares, being dared.
Benvolio, Nephew to Montague, and Friend to Romeo.
Benvolio.No, coz, I rather weep.
Benvolio.Not to his father's; I spoke with his man.
Benvolio.Of love?
Benvolio.Romeo, away, be gone!The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain. - Stand not amaz'd. The prince will doom thee deathIf thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Benvolio.Part, fools! put up your swords; you know not what you do.[Beats down their swords.]
Benvolio.Romeo will answer it.
Benvolio.Romeo! my cousin Romeo!
Benvolio.O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Benvolio.O noble prince. I can discover allThe unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Benvolio.She will indite him to some supper.
Benvolio.Soft! I will go along:An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Benvolio.Strike, drum.
Benvolio.Stop there, stop there.
Benvolio.Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Benvolio.There lies that Tybalt.
Benvolio.The date is out of such prolixity:We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper;Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spokeAfter the prompter, for our entrance:But, let them measure us by what they will,We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Benvolio.The what?
Benvolio.This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves:Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Benvolio.Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Benvolio.Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,Herself pois'd with herself in either eye:But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'dYour lady's love against some other maidThat I will show you shining at this feast,And she shall scant show well that now shows best.
Benvolio.Two, two; a shirt and a smock.
Benvolio.Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning, One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish;Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning; One desperate grief cures with another's languish:Take thou some new infection to thy eye,And the rank poison of the old will die.
Benvolio.Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Benvolio.We talk here in the public haunt of men:Either withdraw unto some private place,And reason coldly of your grievances,Or else depart; here all eyes gaze on us.
Benvolio.Why dost thou stay?
Benvolio.Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Benvolio.Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay;Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethinkHow nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withalYour high displeasure. - All this, - utteredWith gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd, - Could not take truce with the unruly spleenOf Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tiltsWith piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beatsCold death aside, and with the other sendsIt back to Tybalt, whose dexterityRetorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,His agile arm beats down their fatal points,And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose armAn envious thrust from Tybalt hit the lifeOf stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled:But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,And to't they go like lightning; for, ere ICould draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain;And as he fell did Romeo turn and fly.This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
Benvolio.Why, what is Tybalt?
[Breaking open the door of the monument.]
Capulet, }
Capulet.And too soon marr'd are those so early made.The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she, - She is the hopeful lady of my earth:But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,My will to her consent is but a part;An she agree, within her scope of choiceLies my consent and fair according voice.This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,Whereto I have invited many a guest,Such as I love; and you among the store,One more, most welcome, makes my number more.At my poor house look to behold this nightEarth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:Such comfort as do lusty young men feelWhen well apparell'd April on the heelOf limping winter treads, even such delightAmong fresh female buds shall you this nightInherit at my house; hear all, all see,And like her most whose merit most shall be:Which, among view of many, mine, being one,May stand in number, though in reckoning none.Come, go with me. - Go, sirrah, trudge aboutThrough fair Verona; find those persons outWhose names are written there, [gives a paper] and to them say,My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Capulet.A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood! - Now, fellow,
Capulet.All things that we ordained festivalTurn from their office to black funeral:Our instruments to melancholy bells;Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,And all things change them to the contrary.
Boy.He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;And by-and-by my master drew on him;And then I ran away to call the watch.
Capulet.As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie;Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Capulet.But Montague is bound as well as I,In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Capulet.But saying o'er what I have said before:My child is yet a stranger in the world,She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;Let two more summers wither in their prideEre we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Capulet.And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,Good prudence; smatter with your gossips, go.
2 Capulet.By'r Lady, thirty years.
Benvolio.What, art thou hurt?
Capulet.Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Capulet.Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,He bears him like a portly gentleman;And, to say truth, Verona brags of himTo be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:I would not for the wealth of all the townHere in my house do him disparagement:Therefore be patient, take no note of him, - It is my will; the which if thou respect,Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
Capulet.Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock: - Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;Spare not for cost.
Capulet.Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd! - Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou nowTo murder, murder our solemnity? - O child! O child! - my soul, and not my child! - Dead art thou, dead! - alack, my child is dead;And with my child my joys are buried!
Capulet.For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Capulet.Go, nurse, go with her. - We'll to church to-morrow.
Capulet.Go, begone. -
Capulet.Go to, go to!You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed? - This trick may chance to scathe you, - I know what:You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time. - Well said, my hearts! - You are a princox; go:Be quiet, or - More light, more light! - For shame!I'll make you quiet. What! - cheerly, my hearts.
Capulet.God's bread! it makes me mad:Day, night, hour, time, tide, work, play,Alone, in company, still my care hath beenTo have her match'd, and having now providedA gentleman of noble parentage,Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,Proportion'd as one's heart would wish a man, - And then to have a wretched puling fool,A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,To answer, 'I'll not wed, - I cannot love,I am too young, - I pray you pardon me:' - But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you:Graze where you will, you shall not house with me:Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest.Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die i' the streets,For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:Trust to't, bethink you, I'll not be forsworn.
Capulet.Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!I tell thee what, - get thee to church o' Thursday,Or never after look me in the face:Speak not, reply not, do not answer me;My fingers itch. - Wife, we scarce thought us bles'dThat God had lent us but this only child;But now I see this one is one too much,And that we have a curse in having her:Out on her, hilding!
Capulet.Ha! let me see her: - out alas! she's cold;Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;Life and these lips have long been separated:Death lies on her like an untimely frostUpon the sweetest flower of all the field.Accursed time! unfortunate old man!
Benvolio.Tell me in sadness who is that you love?
Capulet.How canst thou try them so?
Capulet.He shall be endur'd:What, goodman boy! - I say he shall; - go to;Am I the master here, or you? go to.You'll not endure him! - God shall mend my soul,You'll make a mutiny among my guests!You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Benvolio.See, where he comes: so please you step aside;I'll know his grievance or be much denied.
Capulet.How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?Proud, - and, I thank you, - and I thank you not; - And yet not proud: - mistress minion, you,Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday nextTo go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!You tallow-face!
Capulet.How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?
Capulet.Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!Thou shalt be logger-head. - Good faith, 'tis day.The county will be here with music straight,For so he said he would: - I hear him near.[Music within.]Nurse! - wife! - what, ho! - what, nurse, I say!
Capulet.Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,Thursday let it be; - a Thursday, tell her,She shall be married to this noble earl. - Will you be ready? do you like this haste?We'll keep no great ado, - a friend or two;For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,It may be thought we held him carelessly,Being our kinsman, if we revel much:Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
Capulet.Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;We have a trifling foolish banquet towards. - Is it e'en so? why then, I thank you all;I thank you, honest gentlemen; good-night. - More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.Ah, sirrah [to 2 Capulet], by my fay, it waxes late;I'll to my rest.
Capulet.Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servant.] - Sirrah, fetch drier logs:Call Peter, he will show thee where they are.
Capulet.No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere nowAll night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Capulet.O, God ye good-en!
Capulet.Send for the county; go tell him of this:I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Capulet.Ready to go, but never to return: - O son, the night before thy wedding dayHath death lain with thy bride: - there she lies,Flower as she was, deflowered by him.Death is my son-in-law, death is my heir;My daughter he hath wedded: I will die.And leave him all; life, living, all is death's.
Capulet.O heaven! - O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!This dagger hath mista'en, - for, lo, his houseIs empty on the back of Montague, - And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!
Capulet.Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tenderOf my child's love: I think she will be rul'dIn all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not. - Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love;And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next, - But, soft! what day is this?
Capulet.Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?Is she not proud? doth she not count her bles'd,Unworthy as she is, that we have wroughtSo worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Capulet.O brother Montague, give me thy hand:This is my daughter's jointure, for no moreCan I demand.
Capulet.My sword, I say! - Old Montague is come,And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
2 Capulet.'Tis more, 'tis more: his son is elder, sir;His son is thirty.
Capulet.Well, be may chance to do some good on her:A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Capulet.Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toesUnplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you. - Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you allWill now deny to dance? she that makes dainty, she,I'll swear hath corns; am I come near you now?Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the dayThat I have worn a visard; and could tellA whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,Such as would please; - 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:You are welcome, gentlemen! - Come, musicians, play.A hall - a hall! give room! and foot it, girls. - [Music plays, and they dance.]More light, you knaves; and turn the tables up,And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot. - Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet;For you and I are past our dancing days;How long is't now since last yourself and IWere in a mask?
Capulet.Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckilyThat we have had no time to move our daughter:Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,And so did I; well, we were born to die.'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night:I promise you, but for your company,I would have been a-bed an hour ago.
Capulet.So many guests invite as here are writ. -
Capulet.Tush, I will stir about,And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her;I'll not to bed to-night; - let me alone;I'll play the housewife for this once. - What, ho! - They are all forth: well, I will walk myselfTo County Paris, to prepare him upAgainst to-morrow: my heart is wondrous lightSince this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Capulet.What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,Some five-and-twenty years; and then we mask'd.
Capulet.Well, get you gone: o' Thursday be it then. - Go you to Juliet, ere you go to bed,Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day. - Farewell, my lord. - Light to my chamber, ho! - Afore me, it is so very very lateThat we may call it early by and by. - Good night.
Capulet.What noise is this? - Give me my long sword, ho!
Capulet.When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew;But for the sunset of my brother's sonIt rains downright. - How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?Evermore showering? In one little bodyThou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs;Who, - raging with thy tears and they with them, - Without a sudden calm, will oversetThy tempest-tossed body. - How now, wife!Have you deliver'd to her our decree?
Capulet.Why, I am glad on't; this is well, - stand up, - This is as't should be. - Let me see the county;Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither. - Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,All our whole city is much bound to him.
Capulet.Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?
Capulet.What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
Capulet.Will you tell me that?His son was but a ward two years ago.
Capulet.Young Romeo, is it?
Capulet's Garden.
Capulet's Garden.
Chor.Two households, both alike in dignity, In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,From ancient grudge break to new mutiny, Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.From forth the fatal loins of these two foes A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love, And the continuance of their parents' rage,Which but their children's end naught could remove, Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;The which, if you with patient ears attend,What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Chorus.
1 Citizen.Up, sir, go with me;I charge thee in the prince's name obey.
1 Citizen.Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
Citizens of Verona; several Men and Women, relations to both
1 Citizen.Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
[Descends.]
[Dies.]
[Dies.]
[Enter Abraham and Balthasar.]
[Enter Balthasar.]
[Enter Apothecary.]
[Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.]
[Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.]
[Enter Benvolio.]
[Drawing his sword.]
[Enter Capulet.]
[Enter Capulet.]
[Enter Benvolio and Romeo.]
Chorus.Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, And young affection gapes to be his heir;That fair for which love groan'd for, and would die, With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again, Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;But to his foe suppos'd he must complain, And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:Being held a foe, he may not have access To breathe such vows as lovers us'd to swear;And she as much in love, her means much less To meet her new beloved anywhere:But passion lends them power, time means, to meet, Tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
Capulet.Peace, you mumbling fool!Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,For here we need it not.
[Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet, Nurse, and Servants.]
[Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet, and others.]
[Enter Capulet, Lady Capulet, and Paris.]
[Enter Capulet, Paris, and Servant.]
[Enter Capulet and Nurse.]
[Enter Capulet, &amp;c. with the Guests the Maskers.]
[Enter Capulet in his gown, and Lady Capulet.]
[Enter Chorus.]
[Enter Chorus.]
[Enter Friar John.]
[Enter Friar Lawrence.]
[Enter Friar Lawrence.]
[Enter Citizens, &amp;c.]
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris.]
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.]
[Enter Friar Lawrence and Paris, with Musicians.]
[Enter Friar Lawrence with a basket.]
[Enter Juliet.]
[Enter Juliet.]
[Enter Juliet.]
[Enter Juliet.]
[Enter Juliet.]
[Enter Juliet.]
[Enter Juliet above.]
[Enter Juliet and Nurse.]
[Enter Lady Capulet.]
[Enter Lady Capulet, and Nurse.]
[Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.]
[Enter Lady Capulet.]
[Enter Lady Capulet.]
[Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, Page, and Servants.]

[Enter Montague and his Lady Montague.]
[Enter Montague and others.]
[Enter Nurse.]
[Enter Nurse.]
[Enter Nurse and Peter.]
[Enter Nurse.]
[Enter Nurse, with cords.]
[Enter Paris, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch.]
[Enter Peter.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six Maskers;Torch-bearers, and others.]
[Enter Romeo.]
[Enter Prince, attended; Montague, Capulet, their Wives,and others.]
[Enter Romeo and Juliet.]
[Enter Romeo and Balthasar with a torch, mattock, &amp;c.]
[Enter Sampson and Gregory armed with swords and bucklers.]
[Enter Servants, with spits, logs and baskets.]
[Enter Tybalt.]
[Enter Watch, with the Page of Paris.]
[Enter several of both Houses, who join the fray; then enterCitizens with clubs.]
[Enter a Servant.]
[Enter, at the other end of the Churchyard, Friar Lawrence, witha lantern, crow, and spade.]
[Enter Tybalt and others.]
[Enter the Prince and Attendants.]
[Enters the monument.]
Escalus, Prince of Verona.
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt Capulet, Lady Capulet, Paris, and Friar.]
[Exeunt Capulet and Paris].
[Exeunt Juliet and Nurse.]
[Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse.]
[Exeunt Mercutio, and Benvolio.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exeunt some of the Watch.]
[Exeunt others of the Watch.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exeunt all but Juliet and Nurse.]
[Exeunt Lady Capulet and Nurse.]
[Exit.]
[Exeunt.] Romeo.
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exeunt Montague and Lady.]
[Exit.]
[Exeunt.]ntreated her come forthAnd bear this work of heaven with patience:But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;And she, too desperate, would not go with me,But, as it seems, did violence on herself.All this I know; and to the marriageHer nurse is privy: and if ought in thisMiscarried 
[Exeunt Prince and Attendants; Capulet, Lady Capulet, Tybalt,Citizens, and Servants.]
[Enter Prince, with Attendants.]
[Exit Friar Lawrence.]
[Exit Page.]
[Exit Peter.]
[Exit Balthasar.]
[Exit below.]
[Exit Romeo.]
[Exit first Servant.]
[Exit second Servant.]
[Falls on Romeo's body and dies.]
Friar.A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips, - Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Friar.Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Friar.[Aside.] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd. - Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Friar.Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;It strains me past the compass of my wits:I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,On Thursday next be married to this county.
Friar.Benedicite!What early tongue so sweet saluteth me? - Young son, it argues a distemper'd headSo soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,And where care lodges sleep will never lie;But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brainDoth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:Therefore thy earliness doth me assureThou art uprous'd with some distemperature;Or if not so, then here I hit it right, - Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Friar.Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift;Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
[Exit Mercutio and Benvolio.]
Friar.Come, come with me, and we will make short work;For, by your leaves, you shall not stay aloneTill holy church incorporate two in one.
Friar.For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
Friar.Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Friar.Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,What torch is yond that vainly lends his lightTo grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,It burneth in the Capels' monument.
Friar.God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?
Friar.Go hence; good night! and here stands all your state:Either be gone before the watch be set,Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.Sojourn in Mantua; I'll find out your man,And he shall signify from time to timeEvery good hap to you that chances here:Give me thy hand; 'tis late; farewell; good night.
Friar.Go with me to the vault.
Friar.Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,Which craves as desperate an executionAs that is desperate which we would prevent.If, rather than to marry County ParisThou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,Then is it likely thou wilt undertakeA thing like death to chide away this shame,That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
Friar.Hark, how they knock! - Who's there? - Romeo, arise;Thou wilt be taken. - Stay awhile; - Stand up;
Friar.Hence from Verona art thou banished:Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Friar.Hold; get you gone, be strong and prosperousIn this resolve: I'll send a friar with speedTo Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
Friar.Hold thy desperate hand:Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art;Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denoteThe unreasonable fury of a beast;Unseemly woman in a seeming man!Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!Thou hast amaz'd me: by my holy order,I thought thy disposition better temper'd.Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?And slay thy lady, too, that lives in thee,By doing damned hate upon thyself?Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meetIn thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.Fie, fie, thou sham'st thy shape, thy love, thy wit;Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,And usest none in that true use indeedWhich should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,Digressing from the valour of a man;Thy dear love sworn, but hollow perjury,Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,Mis-shapen in the conduct of them both,Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,Is set a-fire by thine own ignorance,And thou dismember'd with thine own defence.What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead;There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,But thou slewest Tybalt; there art thou happy too:The law, that threaten'd death, becomes thy friend,And turns it to exile; there art thou happy:A pack of blessings lights upon thy back;Happiness courts thee in her best array;But, like a misbehav'd and sullen wench,Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love: - Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:But, look, thou stay not till the watch be set,For then thou canst not pass to Mantua;Where thou shalt live till we can find a timeTo blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee backWith twenty hundred thousand times more joyThan thou went'st forth in lamentation. - Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady;And bid her hasten all the house to bed,Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.Romeo is coming.
Friar.Hold, then; go home, be merry, give consentTo marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow;To-morrow night look that thou lie alone,Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:Take thou this vial, being then in bed,And this distilled liquor drink thou off:When, presently, through all thy veins shall runA cold and drowsy humour; for no pulseShall keep his native progress, but surcease:No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fadeTo paly ashes; thy eyes' windows fall,Like death, when he shuts up the day of life;Each part, depriv'd of supple government,Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk deathThou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comesTo rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:Then, - as the manner of our country is, - In thy best robes, uncover'd, on the bier,Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vaultWhere all the kindred of the Capulets lie.In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;And hither shall he come: and he and IWill watch thy waking, and that very nightShall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.And this shall free thee from this present shame,If no inconstant toy nor womanish fearAbate thy valour in the acting it.
Friar.Holy Saint Francis! what a change is here!Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,So soon forsaken? young men's love, then, liesNot truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.Jesu Maria, what a deal of brineHath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!How much salt water thrown away in waste,To season love, that of it doth not taste!The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears;Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sitOf an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline;And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then, - Women may fall, when there's no strength in men.
Friar.How long hath he been there?
Friar.I will be brief, for my short date of breathIs not so long as is a tedious tale.Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:I married them; and their stol'n marriage dayWas Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely deathBanish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.You, to remove that siege of grief from her,Betroth'd, and would have married her perforce,To County Paris: - then comes she to me,And with wild looks, bid me devise some meansTo rid her from this second marriage,Or in my cell there would she kill herself.Then gave I her, so tutored by my art,A sleeping potion; which so took effectAs I intended, for it wrought on herThe form of death: meantime I writ to RomeoThat he should hither come as this dire night,To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,Being the time the potion's force should cease.But he which bore my letter, Friar John,Was stay'd by accident; and yesternightReturn'd my letter back. Then all aloneAt the prefixed hour of her wakingCame I to take her from her kindred's vault;Meaning to keep her closely at my cellTill I conveniently could send to Romeo:But when I came, - some minute ere the timeOf her awaking, - here untimely layThe noble Paris and true Romeo dead.She wakes; and I entreated her come forthAnd bear this work of heaven with patience:But then a noise did scare me from the tomb;And she, too desperate, would not go with me,But, as it seems, did violence on herself.All this I know; and to the marriageHer nurse is privy: and if ought in thisMiscarried by my fault, let my old lifeBe sacrific'd, some hour before his time,Unto the rigour of severest law.
Friar.I hear some noise. - Lady, come from that nestOf death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:A greater power than we can contradictHath thwarted our intents: - come, come away!Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;And Paris too: - come, I'll dispose of theeAmong a sisterhood of holy nuns:Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.Come, go, good Juliet [noise within], - I dare no longer stay.
Friar.I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Friar John.Brother, I'll go and bring it thee.
Friar John.Going to find a barefoot brother out,One of our order, to associate me,Here in this city visiting the sick,And finding him, the searchers of the town,Suspecting that we both were in a houseWhere the infectious pestilence did reign,Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth;So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Friar John.Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!
Friar.I am the greatest, able to do least,Yet most suspected, as the time and placeDoth make against me, of this direful murder;And here I stand, both to impeach and purgeMyself condemned and myself excus'd.
Friar John, of the same Order.
Friar John.I could not send it, - here it is again, - Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,So fearful were they of infection.
Friar Lawrence.Now must I to the monument alone;Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake:She will beshrew me much that RomeoHath had no notice of these accidents;But I will write again to Mantua,And keep her at my cell till Romeo come; - Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
Friar Lawrence.Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,The letter was not nice, but full of chargeOf dear import; and the neglecting itMay do much danger. Friar John, go hence;Get me an iron crow and bring it straightUnto my cell.
Friar Lawrence.This same should be the voice of Friar John.Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Friar Lawrence.Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Friar Lawrence's Cell.
Friar Lawrence's Cell.
Friar Lawrence's Cell.
Friar Lawrence's Cell.
Friar.Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Friar Lawrence's cell.
Friar Lawrence, a Franciscan.
Friar.My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now. - My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
Friar.Not in a graveTo lay one in, another out to have.
Friar.O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind prince,Taking thy part, hath brush'd aside the law,And turn'd that black word death to banishment:This is dear mercy, and thou see'st it not.
Friar.O, she knew wellThy love did read by rote, that could not spell.But come, young waverer, come go with me,In one respect I'll thy assistant be;For this alliance may so happy prove,To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Friar.O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Friar.O woeful sympathy!Piteous predicament!
Friar.Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,And thou art wedded to calamity.
Friar.Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives notIn these confusions. Heaven and yourselfHad part in this fair maid; now heaven hath all,And all the better is it for the maid:Your part in her you could not keep from death;But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.The most you sought was her promotion;For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd:And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'dAbove the clouds, as high as heaven itself?O, in this love, you love your child so illThat you run mad, seeing that she is well:She's not well married that lives married long:But she's best married that dies married young.Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemaryOn this fair corse; and, as the custom is,In all her best array bear her to church;For though fond nature bids us all lament,Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Friar.On Thursday, sir? the time is very short.
Friar.Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Friar.Romeo! [Advances.]Alack, alack! what blood is this which stainsThe stony entrance of this sepulchre? - What mean these masterless and gory swordsTo lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Friar.Sir, go you in, - and, madam, go with him; - And go, Sir Paris; - every one prepareTo follow this fair corse unto her grave:The heavens do lower upon you for some ill;Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Friar.Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-nightHave my old feet stumbled at graves! - Who's there?Who is it that consorts, so late, the dead?
Friar.So smile the heavens upon this holy actThat after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
Friar.That's a certain text.
Friar.That's my good son: but where hast thou been then?
Friar.These violent delights have violent ends,And in their triumph die; like fire and powder,Which, as they kiss, consume: the sweetest honeyIs loathsome in his own deliciousness,And in the taste confounds the appetite:Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.Here comes the lady: - O, so light a footWill ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:A lover may bestride the gossamerThat idles in the wanton summer airAnd yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Friar.There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Friar.The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light;And flecked darkness like a drunkard reelsFrom forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye,The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,I must up-fill this osier cage of oursWith baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.The earth, that's nature's mother, is her tomb;What is her burying gave, that is her womb:And from her womb children of divers kindWe sucking on her natural bosom find;Many for many virtues excellent,None but for some, and yet all different.O, mickle is the powerful grace that liesIn plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities:For naught so vile that on the earth doth liveBut to the earth some special good doth give;Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied;And vice sometimes by action dignified.Within the infant rind of this small flowerPoison hath residence, and medicine power:For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.Two such opposed kings encamp them stillIn man as well as herbs, - grace and rude will;And where the worser is predominant,Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Friar.Thou fond mad man, hear me speak a little, -
Friar.Too familiarIs my dear son with such sour company:I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
Friar.Welcome then.
Friar.Who is it?
Friar.Wisely, and slow; they stumble that run fast.
Friar.You say you do not know the lady's mind:Uneven is the course; I like it not.
[Going.]
Go, waken Juliet; go and trim her up;I'll go and chat with Paris: - hie, make haste,Make haste; the bridegroom he is come already:Make haste, I say.
Gregory.But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Gregory.I will frown as I pass by; and let them take it as theylist.
Gregory.Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar.
Gregory.No, marry; I fear thee!
Gregory.No, for then we should be colliers.
Gregory.Do you quarrel, sir?
Gregory.No.
Gregory, Servant to Capulet.
Gregory.Say better; here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
Gregory.How! turn thy back and run?
Gregory.That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to thewall.
Gregory.The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Gregory.The heads of the maids?
Gregory.They must take it in sense that feel it.
Hall in Capulet's House.
Hall in Capulet's House.
Gregory.'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst,thou hadst been poor-John. - Draw thy tool;Here comes two of the house of Montagues.
How oft when men are at the point of deathHave they been merry! which their keepers callA lightning before death: O, how may ICall this a lightning? - O my love! my wife!Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:Thou art not conquer'd; beauty's ensign yetIs crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,And death's pale flag is not advanced there. - Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?O, what more favour can I do to theeThan with that hand that cut thy youth in twainTo sunder his that was thine enemy?Forgive me, cousin! - Ah, dear Juliet,Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believeThat unsubstantial death is amorous;And that the lean abhorred monster keepsThee here in dark to be his paramour?For fear of that I still will stay with thee,And never from this palace of dim nightDepart again: here, here will I remainWith worms that are thy chambermaids: O, hereWill I set up my everlasting rest;And shake the yoke of inauspicious starsFrom this world-wearied flesh. - Eyes, look your last!Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O youThe doors of breath, seal with a righteous kissA dateless bargain to engrossing death! - Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!Thou desperate pilot, now at once run onThe dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!Here's to my love! [Drinks.] - O true apothecary!Thy drugs are quick. - Thus with a kiss I die.
Gregory.To move is to stir; and to be valiant is to stand:therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
Juliet.Ah me!
Juliet.Ah me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
Juliet.Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongueWhich she hath prais'd him with above compareSo many thousand times? - Go, counsellor;Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. - I'll to the friar to know his remedy;If all else fail, myself have power to die.
Juliet.And joy comes well in such a needy time:What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Juliet.A rhyme I learn'd even nowOf one I danc'd withal.
Juliet.Art thou gone so? my lord, my love, my friend!I must hear from thee every day i' the hour,For in a minute there are many days:O, by this count I shall be much in yearsEre I again behold my Romeo!
Juliet.Amen!
Juliet.A thousand times good night!
Juliet.As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Juliet.And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Juliet.Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Juliet.At what o'clock to-morrowShall I send to thee?
Juliet.Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
[He climbs the wall and leaps down within it.]
Juliet.Blister'd be thy tongueFor such a wish! he was not born to shame:Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'dSole monarch of the universal earth.O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Juliet.By-and-by I come: - To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief:To-morrow will I send.
Juliet.But to be frank and give it thee again.And yet I wish but for the thing I have;My bounty is as boundless as the sea,My love as deep; the more I give to thee,The more I have, for both are infinite.I hear some noise within: dear love, adieu! - [Nurse calls within.]Anon, good nurse! - Sweet Montague, be true.Stay but a little, I will come again.
Juliet.Ay, those attires are best: - but, gentle nurse,I pray thee, leave me to myself to-night;For I have need of many orisonsTo move the heavens to smile upon my state,Which, well thou know'st, is cross and full of sin.
Juliet.By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Juliet.Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Juliet.Can heaven be so envious?
Juliet.Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,Brags of his substance, not of ornament:They are but beggars that can count their worth;But my true love is grown to such excess,I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Juliet.Do not swear at all;Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,Which is the god of my idolatry,And I'll believe thee.
Juliet.Farewell! - God knows when we shall meet again.I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veinsThat almost freezes up the heat of life:I'll call them back again to comfort me; - Nurse! - What should she do here?My dismal scene I needs must act alone. - Come, vial. - What if this mixture do not work at all?Shall I be married, then, to-morrow morning? - No, No! - this shall forbid it: - lie thou there. -
Juliet, Daughter to Capulet.
Juliet.Feeling so the loss,I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Juliet.Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Juliet.Go ask his name: if he be married,My grave is like to be my wedding-bed.
Juliet.Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, Which mannerly devotion shows in this;For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
Juliet.Go, get thee hence, for I will not away. -
Juliet.Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,Towards Phoebus' lodging; such a waggonerAs Phaeton would whip you to the westAnd bring in cloudy night immediately. - Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night!That rude eyes may wink, and RomeoLeap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen. - Lovers can see to do their amorous ritesBy their own beauties: or, if love be blind,It best agrees with night. - Come, civil night,Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,And learn me how to lose a winning match,Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,With thy black mantle; till strange love, grown bold,Think true love acted simple modesty.Come, night; - come, Romeo; - come, thou day in night;For thou wilt lie upon the wings of nightWhiter than new snow upon a raven's back. - Come, gentle night; - come, loving, black-brow'd night,Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,Take him and cut him out in little stars,And he will make the face of heaven so fineThat all the world will be in love with night,And pay no worship to the garish sun. - O, I have bought the mansion of a love,But not possess'd it; and, though I am sold,Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this dayAs is the night before some festivalTo an impatient child that hath new robes,And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,And she brings news; and every tongue that speaksBut Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence. -
Juliet.Good father, I beseech you on my knees,Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Juliet.Hie to high fortune! - honest nurse, farewell.
Juliet.Here's such a coil! - come, what says Romeo?
Juliet.Good-even to my ghostly confessor.
Juliet.How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?The orchard walls are high and hard to climb;And the place death, considering who thou art,If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Juliet.How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breathTo say to me that thou art out of breath?The excuse that thou dost make in this delayIs longer than the tale thou dost excuse.Is thy news good or bad? answer to that;Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Juliet.I come anon. - But if thou meanest not well,I do beseech thee, -
Juliet.If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
Juliet.How now, who calls?
Juliet.I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Juliet.Hist! Romeo, hist! - O for a falconer's voiceTo lure this tassel-gentle back again!Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mineWith repetition of my Romeo's name.
Juliet.I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;And yet I would it were to give again.
Juliet.I have.
Friar.Stay then; I'll go alone: - fear comes upon me;O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing.
Juliet.I'll look to like, if looking liking move:But no more deep will I endart mine eyeThan your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Juliet.Indeed I never shall be satisfiedWith Romeo till I behold him - dead - Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd:Madam, if you could find out but a manTo bear a poison, I would temper it,That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhorsTo hear him nam'd, - and cannot come to him, - To wreak the love I bore my cousin TybaltUpon his body that hath slaughter'd him!
Juliet.It is, it is! - hie hence, be gone, away!It is the lark that sings so out of tune,Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.Some say the lark makes sweet division;This doth not so, for she divideth us:Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes;O, now I would they had chang'd voices too!Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.O, now be gone; more light and light it grows.
Juliet.Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,That sees into the bottom of my grief?O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!Delay this marriage for a month, a week;Or, if you do not, make the bridal bedIn that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Juliet.It is an honour that I dream not of.
Juliet.I met the youthful lord at Lawrence' cell;And gave him what becomed love I might,Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Juliet.I will confess to you that I love him.
Juliet.Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.Farewell, dear father.
Juliet.I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:Nay, come, I pray thee speak; - good, good nurse, speak.
Juliet.Madam, in happy time, what day is that?
Juliet.I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Juliet.Madam, I am not well.
Juliet.It may be so, for it is not mine own. - Are you at leisure, holy father, now;Or shall I come to you at evening mass?
Juliet.No, madam; we have cull'd such necessariesAs are behoveful for our state to-morrow:So please you, let me now be left alone,And let the nurse this night sit up with you;For I am sure you have your hands full allIn this so sudden business.
Juliet.My only love sprung from my only hate!Too early seen unknown, and known too late!Prodigious birth of love it is to me,That I must love a loathed enemy.
Juliet.No, no: but all this did I know before.What says he of our marriage? what of that?
Juliet.My ears have yet not drunk a hundred wordsOf that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound;Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Juliet.I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,Remembering how I love thy company.
Juliet.Not proud you have; but thankful that you have:Proud can I never be of what I hate;But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
Juliet.Nurse?
Juliet.Now, good sweet nurse, - O Lord, why look'st thou sad?Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;If good, thou sham'st the music of sweet newsBy playing it to me with so sour a face.
Juliet.Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,He shall not make me there a joyful bride.I wonder at this haste; that I must wedEre he that should be husband comes to woo.I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swearIt shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,Rather than Paris: - these are news indeed!
Juliet.Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,To help me sort such needful ornamentsAs you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
Juliet.Madam, I am here. What is your will?
Juliet.O God! I have an ill-divining soul!Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Juliet.O God! - did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Juliet.O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?Deny thy father and refuse thy name;Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Juliet.O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,From off the battlements of yonder tower;Or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurkWhere serpents are; chain me with roaring bears;Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;Or bid me go into a new-made grave,And hide me with a dead man in his shroud;Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble;And I will do it without fear or doubt,To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
Juliet.O, break, my heart! - poor bankrout, break at once!To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here;And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
Juliet.O comfortable friar! where is my lord? - I do remember well where I should be,And there I am: - where is my Romeo?
Juliet.O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:If thou art fickle, what dost thou with himThat is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune;For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him longBut send him back.
Juliet.O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!Despised substance of divinest show!Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,A damned saint, an honourable villain! - O nature, what hadst thou to do in hellWhen thou didst bower the spirit of a fiendIn mortal paradise of such sweet flesh? - Was ever book containing such vile matterSo fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwellIn such a gorgeous palace!
Juliet.O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Juliet.O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,Come weep with me; past hope, past cure, past help!
Juliet.O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,That monthly changes in her circled orb,Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Juliet.O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Juliet.O God! - O nurse! how shall this be prevented?My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven;How shall that faith return again to earth,Unless that husband send it me from heavenBy leaving earth? - comfort me, counsel me. - Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagemsUpon so soft a subject as myself! - What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?Some comfort, nurse.
Juliet.I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then.I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Juliet.Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Juliet.Romeo!
Juliet.Speakest thou this from thy heart?
Juliet.Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,When I, thy three-hours' wife, have mangled it? - But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;Your tributary drops belong to woe,Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:All this is comfort; wherefore weep I, then?Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,That murder'd me: I would forget it fain;But O, it presses to my memoryLike damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo banished.'That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's deathWas woe enough, if it had ended there:Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship,And needly will be rank'd with other griefs, - Why follow'd not, when she said Tybalt's dead,Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,'Romeo is banished' - to speak that wordIs father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,All slain, all dead: 'Romeo is banished,' - There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,In that word's death; no words can that woe sound. - Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Juliet.That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Juliet.Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,Do thou but call my resolution wise,And with this knife I'll help it presently.God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,Shall be the label to another deed,Or my true heart with treacherous revoltTurn to another, this shall slay them both:Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,Give me some present counsel; or, behold,'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knifeShall play the empire; arbitrating thatWhich the commission of thy years and artCould to no issue of true honour bring.Be not so long to speak; I long to die,If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Juliet.Sweet, so would I:Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.Good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrowThat I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Juliet.The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;In half an hour she promis'd to return.Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so. - O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,Driving back shadows over lowering hills:Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.Now is the sun upon the highmost hillOf this day's journey; and from nine till twelveIs three long hours, - yet she is not come.Had she affections and warm youthful blood,She'd be as swift in motion as a ball;My words would bandy her to my sweet love,And his to me:But old folks, many feign as they were dead;Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead. - O God, she comes![Enter Nurse and Peter].O honey nurse, what news?Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Juliet.That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Juliet.Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Juliet.Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Juliet.The tears have got small victory by that;For it was bad enough before their spite.
Juliet.'Tis almost morning; I would have thee gone:And yet no farther than a wanton's bird;That lets it hop a little from her hand,Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,And with a silk thread plucks it back again,So loving-jealous of his liberty.
Juliet.Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheekFor that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.Fain would I dwell on form,fain, fain denyWhat I have spoke; but farewell compliment!Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say Ay;And I will take thy word: yet, if thou swear'st,Thou mayst prove false; at lovers' perjuries,They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,So thou wilt woo: but else, not for the world.In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond;And therefore thou mayst think my 'haviour light:But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more trueThan those that have more cunning to be strange.I should have been more strange, I must confess,But that thou overheard'st, ere I was 'ware,My true-love passion: therefore pardon me;And not impute this yielding to light love,Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Juliet.Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.If that thy bent of love be honourable,Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,By one that I'll procure to come to thee,Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll layAnd follow thee, my lord, throughout the world.
Juliet.'Tis but thy name that is my enemy; - Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.What's Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,Nor arm, nor face, nor any other partBelonging to a man. O, be some other name!What's in a name? that which we call a roseBy any other name would smell as sweet;So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,Retain that dear perfection which he owesWithout that title: - Romeo, doff thy name;And for that name, which is no part of thee,Take all myself.
Juliet.Villain and he be many miles asunder. - God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
Juliet.To answer that, I should confess to you.
Juliet.Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,Both you and I; for Romeo is exil'd:He made you for a highway to my bed;But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.Come, cords; come, nurse; I'll to my wedding-bed;And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Juliet.Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,Having displeas'd my father, to Lawrence' cell,To make confession and to be absolv'd.
Juliet.What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but I,And that bare vowel I shall poison moreThan the death-darting eye of cockatrice:I am not I if there be such an I;Or those eyes shut that make thee answer I.If he be slain, say I; or if not, no:Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Juliet.What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,So stumblest on my counsel?
Juliet.What must be shall be.
Juliet.What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Juliet.What storm is this that blows so contrary?Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord? - Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!For who is living, if those two are gone?
Juliet.What villain, madam?
Juliet.Where is my mother? - why, she is within;Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!'Your love says, like an honest gentleman, - 'Where is your mother?'
Juliet.Where I have learn'd me to repent the sinOf disobedient oppositionTo you and your behests; and am enjoin'dBy holy Lawrence to fall prostrate here,To beg your pardon: - pardon, I beseech you!Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
Juliet.What's he that now is going out of door?
Juliet.What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Juliet.Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,I have no joy of this contract to-night;It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;Too like the lightning, which doth cease to beEre one can say It lightens. Sweet, good night!This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.Good night, good night! as sweet repose and restCome to thy heart as that within my breast!
Juliet.Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?Is she not down so late, or up so early?What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Juliet.Yea, noise? - Then I'll be brief. - O happy dagger!
Juliet.Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:It was the nightingale, and not the lark,That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear;Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree:Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Juliet.Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet.You kiss by the book.
Juliet.Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I:It is some meteor that the sun exhalesTo be to thee this night a torch-bearerAnd light thee on the way to Mantua:Therefore stay yet, thou need'st not to be gone.
Juliet's Chamber.
Juliet's Chamber; Juliet on the bed.
[Kisses him.]
[Juliet wakes and stirs.]
[Knocking.]
[Knocking.]
Lady Capulet.Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!Most miserable hour that e'er time sawIn lasting labour of his pilgrimage!But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,But one thing to rejoice and solace in,And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!
Lady Capulet.A fortnight and odd days.
Lady Capulet.A crutch, a crutch! - Why call you for a sword?
[Knocking within.]
Lady Capulet.Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live;Therefore have done: some grief shows much of love;But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Lady CapuletAlack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Lady Capulet.Enough of this; I pray thee hold thy peace.
Lady Capulet.Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;But I will watch you from such watching now.
[Knocking.]
Lady Capulet.Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.I would the fool were married to her grave!
Lady Capulet.Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Lady Capulet.Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Lady Capulet.Here comes your father: tell him so yourself,And see how he will take it at your hands.
Lady Capulet.Good night:Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Lady Capulet.Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Lady Capulet.He is a kinsman to the Montague,Affection makes him false, he speaks not true:Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,And all those twenty could but kill one life.I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give;Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live.
Juliet.If I do so, it will be of more price,Being spoke behind your back than to your face.
Lady Capulet.Marry, my child, early next Thursday mornThe gallant, young, and noble gentleman,The County Paris, at St. Peter's Church,Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Lady Capulet.I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
Lady Capulet.Marry, that marry is the very themeI came to talk of. - Tell me, daughter Juliet,How stands your disposition to be married?
Lady Capulet.No, not till Thursday; there is time enough.
Lady Capulet.O me! this sight of death is as a bellThat warns my old age to a sepulchre.
Lady Capulet.Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.
Lady Capulet.O woful time!
Lady Capulet.She's not fourteen.
Lady Capulet.So shall you feel the loss, but not the friendWhich you weep for.
Lady Capulet.Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Lady Capulet.O me, O me! - my child, my only life!Revive, look up, or I will die with thee! - Help, help! - call help.
Lady Capulet.That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Lady Capulet.Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word;Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
Lady Capulet.That same villain Romeo.
Lady Capulet.The people in the street cry Romeo,Some Juliet, and some Paris; and all run,With open outcry, toward our monument.
Lady Capulet.Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child! - O prince! - O husband! - O, the blood is spill'dOf my dear kinsman! - Prince, as thou art true,For blood of ours shed blood of Montague. - O cousin, cousin!
Lady Capulet.This is the matter, - Nurse, give leave awhile,We must talk in secret: nurse, come back again;I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel.Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Lady Capulet.Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Lady Capulet.We follow thee. [Exit Servant.] - Juliet, the county stays.
Lady Capulet.Well, think of marriage now: younger than you,Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,Are made already mothers: by my countI was your mother much upon these yearsThat you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief; - The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
Lady Capulet.Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,Hath sorted out a sudden day of joyThat thou expect'st not, nor I look'd not for.
Lady Capulet.We shall be short in our provision:'Tis now near night.
Lady Capulet.What is the matter?
Lady Capulet.What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?
Lady CapuletWhat noise is here?
Lady Capulet.Why, how now, Juliet?
Lady Capulet.What say you? can you love the gentleman?This night you shall behold him at our feast;Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;Examine every married lineament,And see how one another lends content;And what obscur'd in this fair volume liesFind written in the margent of his eyes.This precious book of love, this unbound lover,To beautify him, only lacks a cover:The fish lives in the sea; and 'tis much prideFor fair without the fair within to hide:That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;So shall you share all that he doth possess,By having him, making yourself no less.
Lady Capulet.We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua, - Where that same banish'd runagate doth live, - Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dramThat he shall soon keep Tybalt company:And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Lady Capulet, Wife to Capulet.
Lady Capulet.Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his deathAs that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
Lady Capulet.[Within.] Ho, daughter! are you up?
Lady Montague.O, where is Romeo? - saw you him to-day? - Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Lady Capulet.You are too hot.
Lady Montague.Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Lady Montague, Wife to Montague.
[Laying Paris in the monument.]
[Laying down her dagger.]
Mantua. A Street.
Mercutio.A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Mercutio.Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Mercutio.A challenge, on my life.
Mercutio.Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabbed with a whitewench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; thevery pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft:and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Mercutio.And but one word with one of us? Couple it with something; makeit a word and a blow.
Mercutio.Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Mercutio.And, to sink in it, should you burden love;Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Mercutio.A sail, a sail, a sail!
Mercutio.Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch; marry, 'tis enough. - Where is my page? - go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Mercutio.Come between us, good Benvolio; my wits faint.
Mercutio.But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower;Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Mercutio.Come, sir, your passado.
Mercutio.Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as any inItaly; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to bemoved.
Mercutio.Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou makeminstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords: here's myfiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Mercutio.Farewell, ancient lady; farewell, - [singing] lady, lady, lady.
Mercutio.Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine lives; that Imean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out ofhis pitcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your earsere it be out.
Mercutio.God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Mercutio.He is wise;And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Mercutio.Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face.
Mercutio.Could you not take some occasion without giving?
Mercutio.By my heel, I care not.
Mercutio.Help me into some house, Benvolio,Or I shall faint. - A plague o' both your houses!They have made worms' meat of me:I have it, and soundly too. - Your houses!
Mercutio.I am hurt; - A plague o' both your houses! - I am sped. - Is he gone, and hath nothing?
Mercutio.I mean, sir, in delayWe waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.Take our good meaning, for our judgment sitsFive times in that ere once in our five wits.
Mercutio, Kinsman to the Prince, and Friend to Romeo.
Mercutio.I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Mercutio.If love be rough with you, be rough with love;Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down. - Give me a case to put my visage in: [Putting on a mask.]A visard for a visard! what care IWhat curious eye doth quote deformities?Here are the beetle-brows shall blush for me.
Mercutio.If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.Now will he sit under a medlar tree,And wish his mistress were that kind of fruitAs maids call medlars when they laugh alone. - Romeo, good night. - I'll to my truckle-bed;This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:Come, shall we go?
Mercutio.Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze;I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Mercutio.More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he's thecourageous captain of compliments. He fights as you singprick-song - keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me hisminim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom: the verybutcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist; a gentleman ofthe very first house, - of the first and second cause: ah, theimmortal passado! the punto reverso! the hay. -
Mercutio.Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Mercutio.Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, forone would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with aman that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thouhast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having noother reason but because thou hast hazel eyes; - what eye but suchan eye would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full ofquarrels as an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath beenbeaten as addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrelledwith a man for coughing in the street, because he hath wakenedthy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fallout with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter? withanother for tying his new shoes with an old riband? and yet thouwilt tutor me from quarrelling!
Mercutio.Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have done; forthou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, I amsure, I have in my whole five: was I with you there for thegoose?
Mercutio.O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!Alla stoccata carries it away. [Draws.]Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?
Mercutio.No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;but 'tis enough, 'twill serve: ask for me to-morrow, and youshall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for thisworld. - A plague o' both your houses! - Zounds, a dog, a rat, amouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, avillain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! - Why the devilcame you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Mercutio.Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Mercutio.O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inchnarrow to an ell broad!
Mercutio.O, thou art deceived; I would have made it short: for I wascome to the whole depth of my tale; and meant indeed to occupythe argument no longer.
Mercutio.Right.
Mercutio.That dreamers often lie.
Mercutio.O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you.She is the fairies' midwife; and she comesIn shape no bigger than an agate-stoneOn the fore-finger of an alderman,Drawn with a team of little atomiesAthwart men's noses as they lie asleep:Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners' legs;The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;The traces, of the smallest spider's web;The collars, of the moonshine's watery beams;Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;Her waggoner, a small grey-coated gnat,Not half so big as a round little wormPrick'd from the lazy finger of a maid:Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.And in this state she gallops night by nightThrough lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight;O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream, - Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,Then dreams he of another benefice:Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,Of healths five fathom deep; and then anonDrums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes;And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,And sleeps again. This is that very MabThat plats the manes of horses in the night;And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs,Which, once untangled, much misfortune bodes:This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,That presses them, and learns them first to bear,Making them women of good carriage:This is she, -
Mercutio.That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains aman to bow in the hams.
Mercutio.The fee simple! O simple!
Mercutio.Nay, I'll conjure too. - Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied;Cry but 'Ah me!' pronounce but Love and dove;Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,One nickname for her purblind son and heir,Young auburn Cupid, he that shot so trimWhen King Cophetua lov'd the beggar-maid! - He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not;The ape is dead, and I must conjure him. - I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
Mercutio.The slip, sir, the slip; can you not conceive?
Mercutio.The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes; thesenew tuners of accents! - 'By Jesu, a very good blade! - a very tallman! - a very good whore!' - Why, is not this a lamentable thing,grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strangeflies, these fashion-mongers, these pardonnez-moi's, who stand somuch on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the oldbench? O, their bons, their bons!
Mercutio.This cannot anger him: 'twould anger himTo raise a spirit in his mistress' circle,Of some strange nature, letting it there standTill she had laid it, and conjur'd it down;That were some spite: my invocationIs fair and honest, and, in his mistress' name,I conjure only but to raise up him.
Mercutio.Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters theconfines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table, and says'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the secondcup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Mercutio.Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Mercutio.Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharpsauce.
Mercutio.Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Mercutio.And so did I.
Mercutio.True, I talk of dreams,Which are the children of an idle brain,Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;Which is as thin of substance as the air,And more inconstant than the wind, who wooesEven now the frozen bosom of the north,And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
Mercutio.'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial isnow upon the prick of noon.
Mercutio.No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that issomething stale and hoar ere it be spent.[Sings.] An old hare hoar, And an old hare hoar, Is very good meat in Lent; But a hare that is hoar Is too much for a score When it hoars ere it be spent.
Mercutio.Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mireOf this - sir-reverence - love, wherein thou stick'stUp to the ears. - Come, we burn daylight, ho.
Mercutio.Where the devil should this Romeo be? - Came he not home to-night?
Mercutio.Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast worn outthy pump;that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest mayremain, after the wearing, sole singular.
Mercutio.Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? now artthou sociable, now art thou Romeo; not art thou what thou art, byart as well as by nature: for this drivelling love is like agreat natural, that runs lolling up and down to hide his baublein a hole.
Mercutio.Without his roe, like a dried herring. - O flesh, flesh, how artthou fishified! - Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowedin: Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench, - marry, she hada better love to be-rhyme her; Dido, a dowdy; Cleopatra, a gypsy;Helen and Hero, hildings and harlots; Thisbe, a gray eye or so,but not to the purpose, -
Mercutio.Why, may one ask?
Mercutio.You are a lover; borrow Cupid's wings,And soar with them above a common bound.
Mercutio.Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith; wisely,wisely.
Montague.But I can give thee more:For I will raise her statue in pure gold;That while Verona by that name is known,There shall no figure at such rate be setAs that of true and faithful Juliet.
Montague.Both by myself and many other friends;But he, his own affections' counsellor,Is to himself, - I will not say how true, - But to himself so secret and so close,So far from sounding and discovery,As is the bud bit with an envious wormEre he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,We would as willingly give cure as know.
Montague.Not Romeo, prince; he was Mercutio's friend;His fault concludes but what the law should end,The life of Tybalt.
Montague.I would thou wert so happy by thy stayTo hear true shrift. - Come, madam, let's away,
Montague.Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach? - Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Montague.Many a morning hath he there been seen,With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs:But all so soon as the all-cheering sunShould in the farthest east begin to drawThe shady curtains from Aurora's bed,Away from light steals home my heavy son,And private in his chamber pens himself;Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight outAnd makes himself an artificial night:Black and portentous must this humour prove,Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Montague,}Heads of two Houses at variance with each other.
Montague.I neither know it nor can learn of him.
1 Musician.An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Montague.Thou villain Capulet! - Hold me not, let me go.
Montague.Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night;Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:What further woe conspires against mine age?
Montague.O thou untaught! what manners is in this,To press before thy father to a grave?
1 Musician.Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
3 Musician.Faith, I know not what to say.
1 Musician.Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
2 Musician.Hang him, Jack! - Come, we'll in here; tarry for themourners, and stay dinner.
2 Musician.I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
1 Musician.Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
1 Musician.No.
1 Musician.Not a dump we: 'tis no time to play now.
2 Musician.Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
1 Musician.Why 'Heart's ease'?
[Musicians waiting. Enter Servants.]
News from Verona! - How now, Balthasar?Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?How doth my lady? Is my father well?How fares my Juliet? that I ask again;For nothing can be ill if she be well.
[Noise within.]
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back againThat late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soulIs but a little way above our heads,Staying for thine to keep him company.Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cordsThat Romeo bid thee fetch?
Nurse.Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the dog: no; Iknow it begins with some other letter: - and she hath theprettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it woulddo you good to hear it.
1 Musician.What a pestilent knave is this same!
Nurse.Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!We are undone, lady, we are undone! - Alack the day! - he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Nurse.A man, young lady! lady, such a manAs all the world - why he's a man of wax.
Nurse.An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an'awere lustier than he is, and twenty such Jacks; and if I cannot,I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of hisflirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. - And thou must standby too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
Nurse.And from my soul too;Or else beshrew them both.
Nurse.An honour! - were not I thine only nurse,I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Nurse.Ah sir! ah sir! - Well, death's the end of all.
Nurse.Anon, anon!Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Nurse.Ay, ay, the cords.
Nurse.Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] - Peter!
Nurse.By my troth, it is well said; - for himself to mar, quoth'a? - Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the youngRomeo?
Nurse.Ay, forsooth.
1 Musician.What will you give us?
Nurse.Even or odd, of all days in the year,Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen.Susan and she, - God rest all Christian souls! - Were of an age: well, Susan is with God;She was too good for me: - but, as I said,On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen;That shall she, marry; I remember it well.'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;And she was wean'd, - I never shall forget it - ,Of all the days of the year, upon that day:For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall;My lord and you were then at Mantua:Nay, I do bear a brain: - but, as I said,When it did taste the wormwood on the nippleOf my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,To see it tetchy, and fall out with the dug!Shake, quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,To bid me trudge.And since that time it is eleven years;For then she could stand alone; nay, by the roodShe could have run and waddled all about;For even the day before, she broke her brow:And then my husband, - God be with his soul!'A was a merry man, - took up the child:'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay:'To see now how a jest shall come about!I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,I never should forget it; 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he;And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Nurse.Faith, here 'tis; RomeoIs banished; and all the world to nothingThat he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,I think it best you married with the county.O, he's a lovely gentleman!Romeo's a dishclout to him; an eagle, madam,Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eyeAs Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,I think you are happy in this second match,For it excels your first: or if it did not,Your first is dead; or 'twere as good he were,As living here, and you no use of him.
Nurse.Even so lies she,Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. - Stand up, stand up; stand, an you be a man:For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand;Why should you fall into so deep an O?
Nurse.Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
1 Musician.Then will I give you the serving-creature.
Nurse.God in heaven bless her! - You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Nurse.God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Nurse.Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Nurse.Good heart, and i' faith I will tell her as much: Lord,Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Nurse.Go, you cot-quean, go,Get you to bed; faith, you'll be sick to-morrowFor this night's watching.
Nurse.His name is Romeo, and a Montague;The only son of your great enemy.
Nurse.If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Nurse.Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
Nurse.I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes, - God save the mark! - here on his manly breast.A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,All in gore-blood; - I swounded at the sight.
Nurse.I know not.
Nurse.I am aweary, give me leave awhile; - Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!
Nurse.Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Nurse.I'll lay fourteen of my teeth, - And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four, - She is not fourteen. How long is it nowTo Lammas-tide?
Nurse.Is it good-den?
Nurse.Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up;For well you know this is a pitiful case.
Nurse.I speak no treason.
Nurse.Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Nurse.It did, it did; alas the day, it did!
Nurse.Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Nurse.Look, look! O heavy day!
Nurse.Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.My back o' t' other side, - O, my back, my back! - Beshrew your heart for sending me aboutTo catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Nurse.I will tell her, sir, - that you do protest: which, as Itake it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Nurse.Madam!
Nurse.Hie to your chamber. I'll find RomeoTo comfort you: I wot well where he is.Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:I'll to him; he is hid at Lawrence' cell.
Nurse.Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Nurse.Marry, bachelor,Her mother is the lady of the house.And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous:I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal;I tell you, he that can lay hold of herShall have the chinks.
Nurse.Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.
Nurse.Marry, farewell! - I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant wasthis that was so full of his ropery?
Nurse.Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Nurse.May not one speak?
Nurse.Mistress! - what, mistress! - Juliet! - fast, I warrant her, she: - Why, lamb! - why, lady! - fie, you slug-abed! - Why, love, I say! - madam! sweetheart! - why, bride! - What, not a word? - you take your pennyworths now;Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,The County Paris hath set up his restThat you shall rest but little. - God forgive me!Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!I needs must wake her. - Madam, madam, madam! - Ay, let the county take you in your bed;He'll fright you up, i' faith. - Will it not be?What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!I must needs wake you. - lady! lady! lady! - Alas, alas! - Help, help! My lady's dead! - O, well-a-day that ever I was born! - Some aqua-vitae, ho! - my lord! my lady!
Nurse.My fan, Peter.
Nurse.Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower.
Nurse.No less! nay, bigger; women grow by men
Nurse.Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about mequivers. Scurvy knave! - Pray you, sir, a word: and, as I toldyou, my young lady bid me enquire you out; what she bade me say Iwill keep to myself: but first let me tell ye, if ye should leadher into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very grosskind of behaviour, as they say: for the gentlewoman is young;and, therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it werean ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weakdealing.
Nurse.Now, by my maidenhea, - at twelve year old, - I bade her come. - What, lamb! what ladybird! - God forbid! - where's this girl? - what, Juliet!
Nurse.No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Nurse.O God's lady dear!Are you so hot? marry,come up, I trow;Is this the poultice for my aching bones?Henceforward,do your messages yourself.
Nurse.Now God in heaven bless thee! - Hark you, sir.
Nurse.O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the nightTo hear good counsel: O, what learning is! - My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Nurse.O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!That ever I should live to see thee dead!
Nurse.O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Nurse.O lamentable day!
Nurse.O lamentable day!
Nurse.O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;And now falls on her bed; and then starts up,And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,And then down falls again.
Nurse.O, he is even in my mistress' case, - Just in her case!
Nurse.Out upon you! what a man are you!
Nurse.Peter!
Nurse.O woe! O woeful, woeful, woeful day!Most lamentable day, most woeful dayThat ever, ever, I did yet behold!O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!Never was seen so black a day as this:O woeful day! O woeful day!
Nurse.Peter, stay at the gate.
Nurse.Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd:An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Nurse.Peter, take my fan, and go before.
Nurse.See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Nurse.Romeo can,Though heaven cannot. - O Romeo, Romeo! - Who ever would have thought it? - Romeo!
Nurse.She's dead, deceas'd, she's dead; alack the day!
Nurse.Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence' cell;There stays a husband to make you a wife:Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.Hie you to church; I must another way,To fetch a ladder, by the which your loveMust climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;But you shall bear the burden soon at night.Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Nurse.There's no trust,No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. - Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae. - These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.Shame come to Romeo!
Nurse.They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Nurse.This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
Nurse.Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Nurse.Well, sir; my mistress is the sweetest lady. - Lord, Lord!when 'twas a little prating thing, - O, there's a nobleman intown, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, goodsoul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I angerher sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; butI'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any cloutin the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both witha letter?
Nurse.Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Nurse.The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Nurse.What?
Nurse.Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how tochoose a man: Romeo! no, not he; rhough his face be better thanany man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and afoot, and a body, - though they be not to be talked on, yet theyare past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy, - but I'llwarrant him as gentle as a lamb. - Go thy ways, wench; serve God.--What, have you dined at home?
Nurse.What's this? What's this?
Nurse.Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Nurse.[Within.] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand;I come from Lady Juliet.
Nurse.Yes, madam; - yet I cannot choose but laugh,To think it should leave crying, and say 'Ay:'And yet, I warrant, it had upon its browA bump as big as a young cockerel's stone;A parlous knock; and it cried bitterly.'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?Thou wilt fall backward when thou com'st to age;Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Nurse.[Within.] Madam!
Nurse.[Within.] Madam!
Nurse.Your love says, like an honest gentleman,And a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome;And, I warrant, a virtuous, - Where is your mother?
Nurse.Your mother.
Nurse.You say well.
Nurse to Juliet.
Page.[Aside.] I am almost afraid to stand aloneHere in the churchyard; yet I will adventure.
PERSONS REPRESENTED
[One calls within, 'Juliet.']
Paris.Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown! - O love! O life! - not life, but love in death!
Page.O lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
Page to Paris; another Page.
Page.This is the place; there, where the torch doth burn.
Paris.Come you to make confession to this father?
Nurse.Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:The day is broke; be wary, look about.
Paris.Do not deny to him that you love me.
Paris.Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof; - Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground;So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread, - Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, - But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,As signal that thou hear'st something approach.Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Paris.God shield I should disturb devotion! - Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse you:Till then, adieu; and keep this holy kiss.
Paris.Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Paris.Have I thought long to see this morning's face,And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Paris.I do defy thy conjurations,And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Paris.My father Capulet will have it so;And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Paris.Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,And therefore have I little talk'd of love;For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.Now, sir, her father counts it dangerousThat she do give her sorrow so much sway;And, in his wisdom, hastes our marriage,To stop the inundation of her tears;Which, too much minded by herself alone,May be put from her by society:Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Paris.My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
Paris.Monday, my lord.
Paris.O, I am slain! [Falls.] If thou be merciful,Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet.
Paris.Of honourable reckoning are you both;And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Paris.Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Paris.Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew: O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones!Which with sweet water nightly I will dew; Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:The obsequies that I for thee will keep,Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Paris.So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Paris.That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
Paris.These times of woe afford no tune to woo. - Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter.
Paris.Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Paris.Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it.
Paris.Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Paris, a young Nobleman, kinsman to the Prince.
Peter.Anon.
Peter.Anon?
Peter.I will then give it you soundly.
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure; if I had, my weaponshould quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare draw as soonas another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the lawon my side.
Peter.Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease':O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Peter.No money, on my faith; but the gleek, - I will give you theminstrel.
Peter.O, I cry you mercy; you are the singer: I will say for you.It is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have nogold for sounding: -
Peter.O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart isfull of woe': O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
Peter.Pretty! - What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
Peter, Servant to Juliet's Nurse.
Peter.Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with aniron wit, and put up my iron dagger. - Answer me like men:
Peter.Pretty too! - What say you, James Soundpost?
Peter.Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you, I'll fa you: do you noteme?
Peter.You will not then?
Prince.A glooming peace this morning with it brings; The sun for sorrow will not show his head.Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things; Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;For never was a story of more woeThan this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain; - And Juliet bleeding; warm, and newly dead,Who here hath lain this two days buried. - Go, tell the prince; - run to the Capulets, - Raise up the Montagues, - some others search: -
Prince.And for that offenceImmediately we do exile him hence:I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;But I'll amerce you with so strong a fineThat you shall all repent the loss of mine:I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses,Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.Bear hence this body, and attend our will:Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Prince.Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Prince.Come, Montague; for thou art early up,To see thy son and heir more early down.
Prince.Look, and thou shalt see.
Prince.Give me the letter, - I will look on it. - Where is the county's page that rais'd the watch? - Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Prince.Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel, - Will they not hear? - What, ho! you men, you beasts,That quench the fire of your pernicious rageWith purple fountains issuing from your veins, - On pain of torture, from those bloody handsThrow your mistemper'd weapons to the groundAnd hear the sentence of your moved prince. - Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets;And made Verona's ancient citizensCast by their grave beseeming ornaments,To wield old partisans, in hands as old,Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:If ever you disturb our streets again,Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.For this time, all the rest depart away: - You, Capulet, shall go along with me; - And, Montague, come you this afternoon,To know our farther pleasure in this case,To old Free-town, our common judgment-place. - Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Prince.Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio:Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Prince.Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,Till we can clear these ambiguities,And know their spring, their head, their true descent;And then will I be general of your woes,And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,And let mischance be slave to patience. - Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
Prince.Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Prince.Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
Prince.This letter doth make good the friar's words,Their course of love, the tidings of her death:And here he writes that he did buy a poisonOf a poor 'pothecary, and therewithalCame to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet. - Where be these enemies? - Capulet, - Montague, - See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!And I, for winking at your discords too,Have lost a brace of kinsmen: - all are punish'd.
Prince.What misadventure is so early up,That calls our person from our morning's rest?
Prince.We still have known thee for a holy man. - Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?
Prince.What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Prince.Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
[Re-enter Benvolio.]
[Re-enter Juliet, above.]
[Re-enter Nurse.]
[Re-enter some of the Watch with Balthasar.]
[Re-enter Tybalt.]
[Retires.]
[Retires.]
[Re-enter others of the Watch with Friar Lawrence.]
[Retires.]
Romeo.A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk; andwill speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
[Retirong slowly.]
Romeo.Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joyBe heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be moreTo blazon it, then sweeten with thy breathThis neighbour air, and let rich music's tongueUnfold the imagin'd happiness that bothReceive in either by this dear encounter.
Romeo.Alack, there lies more peril in thine eyeThan twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,And I am proof against their enmity.
Romeo.Alive in triumph! and Mercutio slain!Away to heaven respective lenity,And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now! -
Romeo.And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,Forgetting any other home but this.
Romeo.A most courteous exposition.
Romeo.Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,It cannot countervail the exchange of joyThat one short minute gives me in her sight:Do thou but close our hands with holy words,Then love-devouring death do what he dare, - It is enough I may but call her mine.
Romeo.And bad'st me bury love.
Romeo.Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! - Where shall we dine? - O me! - What fray was here?Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.Here's much to do with hate, but more with love: - Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!O anything, of nothing first create!O heavy lightness! serious vanity!Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! - This love feel I, that feel no love in this.Dost thou not laugh?
Romeo.And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Romeo.And we mean well, in going to this mask;But 'tis no wit to go.
Romeo.And is it not, then, well served in to a sweet goose?
Romeo.Art thou so bare and full of wretchednessAnd fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back,The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law:The world affords no law to make thee rich;Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Romeo.A right good markman! - And she's fair I love.
Romeo.And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey-wall:Within this hour my man shall be with thee,And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair;Which to the high top-gallant of my joyMust be my convoy in the secret night.Farewell; be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:Farewell; commend me to thy mistress.
Romeo.As if that name,Shot from the deadly level of a gun,Did murder her; as that name's cursed handMurder'd her kinsman. - O, tell me, friar, tell me,In what vile part of this anatomyDoth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sackThe hateful mansion.
Romeo.[Aside.] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Romeo.A thousand times the worse, to want thy light! - Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;But love from love, towards school with heavy looks.
Romeo.A torch for me: let wantons, light of heart,Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase, - I'll be a candle-holder and look on, - The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
Romeo.At the hour of nine.
Romeo.Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Romeo.Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Romeo.Ay, nurse; what of that? both with an R.
Romeo.Ay me! sad hours seem long.Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Romeo.Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Romeo.Bid a sick man in sadness make his will, - Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill! - In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Romeo.Bid her devise some means to come to shriftThis afternoon;And there she shall at Friar Lawrence' cellBe shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
Romeo.By love, that first did prompt me to enquire;He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as farAs that vast shore wash'd with the furthest sea,I would adventure for such merchandise.
Romeo.But that a joy past joy calls out on me,It were a grief so brief to part with thee:Farewell.
Romeo.By a nameI know not how to tell thee who I am:My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,Because it is an enemy to thee.Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Romeo.Can I go forward when my heart is here?Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Romeo.Come hither, man. - I see that thou art poor;Hold, there is forty ducats: let me haveA dram of poison; such soon-speeding gearAs will disperse itself through all the veinsThat the life-weary taker mall fall dead;And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breathAs violently as hasty powder fir'dDoth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Romeo.Commend me to thy lady.
Romeo.Courage, man; the hurt cannot be much.
Romeo.Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Romeo.Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons. - Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage! - Tybalt, - Mercutio, - the prince expressly hathForbid this bandying in Verona streets. - Hold, Tybalt! - good Mercutio! - [Exeunt Tybalt with his Partizans.]
Romeo.Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend.
Romeo.Farewell!I will omit no opportunityThat may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Romeo.Father, what news? what is the prince's doomWhat sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,That I yet know not?
Romeo.Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Romeo.For your broken shin.
Romeo.Give me a torch, - I am not for this ambling;Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Romeo.Good heart, at what?
Romeo.Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.Hold, take this letter; early in the morningSee thou deliver it to my lord and father.Give me the light; upon thy life I charge thee,Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloofAnd do not interrupt me in my course.Why I descend into this bed of deathIs partly to behold my lady's face,But chiefly to take thence from her dead fingerA precious ring, - a ring that I must useIn dear employment: therefore hence, be gone: - But if thou, jealous, dost return to pryIn what I further shall intend to do,By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint,And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:The time and my intents are savage-wild;More fierce and more inexorable farThan empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Romeo.Good morrow, father!
Romeo.Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Romeo.Go to; I say you shall.
Romeo.Ha, banishment? be merciful, say death;For exile hath more terror in his look,Much more than death; do not say banishment.
Romeo.Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Romeo.He jests at scars that never felt a wound. - [Juliet appears above at a window.]But soft! what light through yonder window breaks?It is the east, and Juliet is the sun! - Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,Who is already sick and pale with grief,That thou her maid art far more fair than she:Be not her maid, since she is envious;Her vestal livery is but sick and green,And none but fools do wear it; cast it off. - It is my lady; O, it is my love!O, that she knew she were! - She speaks, yet she says nothing: what of that?Her eye discourses, I will answer it. - I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,Having some business, do entreat her eyesTo twinkle in their spheres till they return.What if her eyes were there, they in her head?The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heavenWould through the airy region stream so brightThat birds would sing and think it were not night. - See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!O that I were a glove upon that hand,That I might touch that cheek!
Romeo.How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Romeo.Here's goodly gear!
Romeo.How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Romeo.I can tell you: but young Romeo will be older when you havefound him than he was when you sought him: I am the youngest ofthat name, for fault of a worse.
Romeo.I am too sore enpierced with his shaftTo soar with his light feathers; and so bound,I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:Under love's heavy burden do I sink.
Romeo.I do protest I never injur'd thee;But love thee better than thou canst deviseTill thou shalt know the reason of my love:And so good Capulet, - which name I tenderAs dearly as mine own, - be satisfied.
Romeo.I dreamt a dream to-night.
Romeo.I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serveFor sweet discourses in our time to come.
Romeo.I fear, too early: for my mind misgivesSome consequence, yet hanging in the stars,Shall bitterly begin his fearful dateWith this night's revels; and expire the termOf a despised life, clos'd in my breast,By some vile forfeit of untimely death:But He that hath the steerage of my courseDirect my sail! - On, lusty gentlemen!
Romeo.If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,My dreams presage some joyful news at hand;My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne;And all this day an unaccustom'd spiritLifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.I dreamt my lady came and found me dead, - Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think! - And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips,That I reviv'd, and was an emperor.Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
Romeo.I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;And, but thou love me, let them find me here.My life were better ended by their hateThan death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Romeo.If my heart's dear love, -
Romeo.I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
Romeo.I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.I have been feasting with mine enemy;Where, on a sudden, one hath wounded meThat's by me wounded. Both our remediesWithin thy help and holy physic lies;I bear no hatred, blessed man; for, lo,My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Romeo.I must indeed; and therefore came I hither. - Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man;Fly hence and leave me: - think upon these gone;Let them affright thee. - I beseech thee, youth,Put not another sin upon my headBy urging me to fury: O, be gone!By heaven, I love thee better than myself;For I come hither arm'd against myself:Stay not, be gone; - live, and hereafter say,A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
Romeo.Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Romeo.In faith, I will. - Let me peruse this face: - Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris! - What said my man, when my betossed soulDid not attend him as we rode? I thinkHe told me Paris should have married Juliet:Said he not so? or did I dream it so?Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,To think it was so? - O, give me thy hand,One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave; - A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makesThis vault a feasting presence full of light.Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Romeo.I pay thy poverty, and not thy will.
Romeo.I pray thee chide not: she whom I love nowDoth grace for grace and love for love allow;The other did not so.
Romeo.Is it even so? then I defy you, stars! - Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,And hire post-horses. I will hence to-night.
Romeo.Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,Too rude, too boisterous; and it pricks like thorn.
Romeo.Is the day so young?
Romeo.I thought all for the best.
Romeo.I take thee at thy word:Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Romeo.It was the lark, the herald of the morn,No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaksDo lace the severing clouds in yonder east:Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund dayStands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Romeo.It is my soul that calls upon my name:How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,Like softest music to attending ears!
Romeo.I stretch it out for that word broad: which added to thegoose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Romeo.I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
Romeo.I would I were thy bird.
Romeo.I will follow you.
Romeo.Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops, -
Romeo.Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death;I am content, so thou wilt have it so.I'll say yon gray is not the morning's eye,'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beatThe vaulty heaven so high above our heads:I have more care to stay than will to go. - Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so. - How is't, my soul? let's talk, - it is not day.
Romeo.Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Romeo.Meaning, to court'sy.
Romeo.My dear?
Romeo.Nay, that's not so.
Romeo.Nay, good goose, bite not.
Romeo.More light and light, - more dark and dark our woes!
Romeo.Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Romeo.Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes,With nimble soles; I have a soul of leadSo stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Romeo.No matter: get thee gone,And hire those horses; I'll be with thee straight.
Romeo.Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
Romeo.Not having that which, having, makes them short.
Romeo.Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest untothee, -
Romeo.Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;Shut up in prison, kept without my food,Whipp'd and tormented and - God-den, good fellow.
Romeo.Nurse!
Romeo.O, I am fortune's fool!
Romeo.In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Romeo.One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
Romeo.O, let us hence; I stand on sudden haste.
Romeo.O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,Being in night, all this is but a dream,Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Romeo.Is she a Capulet?O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Romeo.O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!It seems she hangs upon the cheek of nightLike a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear;Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!So shows a snowy dove trooping with crowsAs yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.The measure done, I'll watch her place of standAnd, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Romeo.O, teach me how I should forget to think.
Romeo.O single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo.O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do;They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
Romeo! O, pale! - Who else? what, Paris too?And steep'd in blood? - Ah, what an unkind hourIs guilty of this lamentable chance! - The lady stirs.
Romeo.O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Romeo.Out, -
Romeo.Out of her favour where I am in love.
Romeo.O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Romeo.Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace,Thou talk'st of nothing.
Romeo.Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great; and in such acase as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Paris.This is that banish'd haughty MontagueThat murder'd my love's cousin, - with which grief,It is supposed, the fair creature died, - And here is come to do some villanous shameTo the dead bodies: I will apprehend him. -
Romeo.Pink for flower.
Romeo.Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!Give me my sin again.
Romeo.Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast! - Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
Romeo.She speaks: - O, speak again, bright angel! for thou artAs glorious to this night, being o'er my head,As is a winged messenger of heavenUnto the white-upturned wondering eyesOf mortals that fall back to gaze on himWhen he bestrides the lazy-pacing cloudsAnd sails upon the bosom of the air.
Romeo, Son to Montague.
Romeo.She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;For beauty, starv'd with her severity,Cuts beauty off from all posterity.She is too fair, too wise; wisely too fair,To merit bliss by making me despair:She hath forsworn to love; and in that vowDo I live dead that live to tell it now.
Romeo.So shalt thou show me friendship. - Take thou that:Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow.
Romeo.Stay, fellow; I can read. [Reads.]'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters; thelady widow of Vitruvio; Signior Placentio andhis lovely nieces; Mercutio and his brotherValentine; mine uncle Capulet, his wife, anddaughters; my fair niece Rosaline; Livia; SigniorValentio and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio and thelively Helena.'A fair assembly. [Gives back the paper]: whither should theycome?
Romeo.Swits and spurs, swits and spurs; or I'll cry a match.
Romeo.Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?Doth not she think me an old murderer,Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joyWith blood remov'd but little from her own?Where is she? and how doth she/ and what saysMy conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Romeo.The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Romeo.That last is true; the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo.Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd.[Kissing her.]
Romeo.There is thy gold; worse poison to men's souls,Doing more murders in this loathsome worldThan these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell:I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.Farewell: buy food and get thyself in flesh. - Come, cordial and not poison, go with meTo Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
Romeo.Then plainly know my heart's dear love is setOn the fair daughter of rich Capulet:As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine;And all combin'd, save what thou must combineBy holy marriage: when, and where, and howWe met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,That thou consent to marry us to-day.
Romeo.There is no world without Verona walls,But purgatory, torture, hell itself.Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,And world's exile is death, - then banishedIs death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,And smil'st upon the stroke that murders me.
Romeo.So thrive my soul, -
Romeo.This gentleman, the prince's near ally,My very friend, hath got his mortal hurtIn my behalf; my reputation stain'dWith Tybalt's slander, - Tybalt, that an hourHath been my kinsman. - O sweet Juliet,Thy beauty hath made me effeminateAnd in my temper soften'd valour's steel.
Romeo.This day's black fate on more days doth depend;This but begins the woe others must end.
Romeo.Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,Doting like me, and like me banished,Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,And fall upon the ground, as I do now,Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Romeo.This shall determine that.
Romeo.Thou chidd'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Romeo.Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast notthere for the goose.
Romeo.'Tis the wayTo call hers, exquisite, in question more:These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair;He that is strucken blind cannot forgetThe precious treasure of his eyesight lost:Show me a mistress that is passing fair,What doth her beauty serve but as a noteWhere I may read who pass'd that passing fair?Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget.
Romeo.'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,Where Juliet lives; and every cat, and dog,And little mouse, every unworthy thing,Live here in heaven, and may look on her;But Romeo may not. - More validity,More honourable state, more courtship livesIn carrion flies than Romeo: they may seizeOn the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand,And steal immortal blessing from her lips;Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;But Romeo may not; he is banished, - This may flies do, when I from this must fly.And sayest thou yet that exile is not death!Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,But banished to kill me; banished?O friar, the damned use that word in hell;Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,To mangle me with that word banishment?
Romeo.[To Juliet.] If I profane with my unworthiest hand This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this, - My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
Romeo.Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Romeo.Tush, thou art deceiv'd:Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Romeo.Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Romeo.Tybalt, the reason that I have to love theeDoth much excuse the appertaining rageTo such a greeting. Villain am I none;Therefore farewell; I see thou know'st me not.
Romeo.Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hitWith Cupid's arrow, - she hath Dian's wit;And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.She will not stay the siege of loving termsNor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:O, she's rich in beauty; only poorThat, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Romeo.Well, what was yours?
Romeo.What hast thou found?
Romeo.What is her mother?
Romeo.What lady is that, which doth enrich the handOf yonder knight?
Romeo.What less than doomsday is the prince's doom?
Romeo.What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Romeo.What shall I swear by?
Romeo.What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Romeo.What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?Or shall we on without apology?
Romeo.Whither?
Romeo.Whose house?
Romeo.When the devout religion of mine eye Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;And these, - who, often drown'd, could never die, -  Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!One fairer than my love? the all-seeing sunNe'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Romeo.Why, such is love's transgression. - Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast;Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prestWith more of thine: this love that thou hast shownDoth add more grief to too much of mine own.Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:What is it else? a madness most discreet,A choking gall, and a preserving sweet. - Farewell, my coz.
Romeo.Why, then is my pump well-flowered.
Romeo.Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
Romeo.Yet banished? Hang up philosophy!Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,It helps not, it prevails not, - talk no more.
Romeo.With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no;I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll to dinner thither.
Romeo.With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;For stony limits cannot hold love out:And what love can do, that dares love attempt;Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Romeo.Your plantain-leaf is excellent for that.
Romeo.Would'st thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
Room in Capulet's House.
Run to my study. - By-and-by! - God's will!What simpleness is this. - I come, I come!
Sampson.A dog of that house shall move me to stand:I will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
SCENE. - During the greater part of the Play in Verona; once, in the Fifth Act, at Mantua.
Romeo.What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
Sampson.A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Sampson.Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads;take it in what sense thou wilt.
Sampson.But if you do, sir, am for you: I serve as good a man asyou.
Sampson.Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals.
Sampson.I do bite my thumb, sir.
Sampson.I mean, an we be in choler we'll draw.
Sampson.Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Sampson.I strike quickly, being moved.
Sampson.Me they shall feel while I am able to stand:and 'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
Sampson.No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite mythumb, sir.
Sampson.My naked weapon is out: quarrel! I will back thee.
Sampson.Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which isdisgrace to them if they bear it.
Sampson.Draw, if you be men. - Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Sampson.'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant:when I have fought with the men I will be cruel with the maids,I will cut off their heads.
Sampson, Servant to Capulet.
Sampson.Well, sir.
Sampson.True; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push Montague's menfrom the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
Sampson.Yes, better, sir.
Scene 5
Scene 4
Scene 1
Scene 5
Scene 3
Scene 4
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 2
Scene 1
Scene 1
Scene 5
Scene 2
Scene 6
Scene 4
Scene 2
Scene 3
Scene 5
Scene 1
Scene 4
Scene 1
Scene 2
Scene 3
Sampson.Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Scene 3
Sampson.Fear me not.
2 Servant.Ay, boy, ready.
Servant.Find them out whose names are written here!It is written that the shoemaker should meddle withhis yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher withhis pencil, and the painter with his nets; but I amsent to find those persons whose names are here writ,and can never find what names the writing personhath here writ. I must to the learned: - in good time!
Servant.God gi' go-den. - I pray, sir, can you read?
2 Servant.I have a head, sir, that will find out logsAnd never trouble Peter for the matter.
Servant.I know not, sir.
Servant.My master's.
2 Servant.Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers:therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
Servant.Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, youcalled, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursedin the pantry, and everything in extremity. I musthence to wait; I beseech you, follow straight.
Servant.Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the greatrich Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues,I pray, come and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry!
1 Servant.Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cupboard, lookto the plate: - good thou, save me a piece of marchpane; and asthou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell. - Antony! and Potpan!
Servant.Perhaps you have learned it without book:but I pray, can you read anything you see?
Servant.To supper; to our house.
1 Servant.Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
2 Servant.We cannot be here and there too. - Cheerly, boys;be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Servant.Up.
2 Servant.When good manners shall lie all in one or two men'shands, and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
1 Servant.Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?he shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
Servant.Ye say honestly: rest you merry!
1 Servant.You are looked for and called for, asked forand sought for in the great chamber.
Signior Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation to yourFrench slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
[Snatching Romeo's dagger.]
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
2 Servant.You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they canlick their fingers.
[The Page whistles.]
The boy gives warning something doth approach.What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?What, with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
'Then music with her silver sound With speedy help doth lend redress.'
THE PROLOGUE
[They fight; Tybalt falls.]
[They fight.]
Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee;Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
This is thy sheath [stabs herself]; there rest, and let me die.
[They retire behind.]
Three Musicians.
[Throws herself on the bed.]
[Throws them down.]
Thy lips are warm!
Tybalt.Boy, this shall not excuse the injuriesThat thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Tybalt.Follow me close, for I will speak to them. - Gentlemen, good-den:a word with one of you.
Tybalt.I am for you. [Drawing.]
Tybalt, Nephew to Lady Capulet.
Tybalt.It fits, when such a villain is a guest:I'll not endure him.
Tybalt.Romeo, the love I bear thee can affordNo better term than this, - Thou art a villain.
Tybalt.Patience perforce with wilful choler meetingMakes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall,Now seeming sweet, convert to bitter gall.
Tybalt.Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo, -
Tybalt.This, by his voice, should be a Montague. - Fetch me my rapier, boy: - what, dares the slaveCome hither, cover'd with an antic face,To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Tybalt.Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,Shalt with him hence.
Tybalt.Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;A villain, that is hither come in spite,To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Tybalt.Well, peace be with you, sir. - Here comes my man.
Tybalt.What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?Turn thee Benvolio, look upon thy death.
Tybalt.What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the wordAs I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:Have at thee, coward!
Tybalt.What wouldst thou have with me?
Tybalt.Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
1 Watch.A great suspicion: stay the friar too.
Tybalt.You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will giveme occasion.
3 Watch.Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs, and weeps:We took this mattock and this spade from himAs he was coming from this churchyard side.
1 Watch.Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,With instruments upon them fit to openThese dead men's tombs.
Tybalt.'Tis he, that villain, Romeo.
2 Watch.Here's Romeo's man; we found him in the churchyard.
1 Watch.Hold him in safety till the prince come hither.
1 Watch.The ground is bloody; search about the churchyard:Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach.
1 Watch.Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,Warm and new kill'd.
1 Watch.[Within.] Lead, boy: - which way?
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie;But the true ground of all these piteous woesWe cannot without circumstance descry.
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time. - What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.Let's see for means; - O mischief, thou art swiftTo enter in the thoughts of desperate men!I do remember an apothecary, - And hereabouts he dwells, - which late I notedIn tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,Culling of simples; meagre were his looks,Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,An alligator stuff'd, and other skinsOf ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelvesA beggarly account of empty boxes,Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses,Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show.Noting this penury, to myself I said,An if a man did need a poison now,Whose sale is present death in Mantua,Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.O, this same thought did but forerun my need;And this same needy man must sell it me.As I remember, this should be the house:Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. - What, ho! apothecary!
What's here? a cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end: - O churl! drink all, and left no friendly dropTo help me after? - I will kiss thy lips;Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,To make me die with a restorative.
What if it be a poison, which the friarSubtly hath minister'd to have me dead,Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,Because he married me before to Romeo?I fear it is: and yet methinks it should not,For he hath still been tried a holy man: - I will not entertain so bad a thought. - How if, when I am laid into the tomb,I wake before the time that RomeoCome to redeem me? there's a fearful point!Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?Or, if I live, is it not very likeThe horrible conceit of death and night,Together with the terror of the place, - As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,Where, for this many hundred years, the bonesOf all my buried ancestors are pack'd;Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,Lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say,At some hours in the night spirits resort; - Alack, alack, is it not like that I,So early waking, - what with loathsome smells,And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,That living mortals, hearing them, run mad; - O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,Environed with all these hideous fears?And madly play with my forefathers' joints?And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,As with a club, dash out my desperate brains? - O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghostSeeking out Romeo, that did spit his bodyUpon a rapier's point: - stay, Tybalt, stay! - Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
What's there?
houses; Maskers, Guards, Watchmen, and Attendants.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound, And doleful dumps the mind oppress, Then music with her silver sound' -
Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver sound'? - What say you, Simon Catling?
